---
layout: post
title:  "Format"
date:   2021-06-05
categories: C++ standardization format
tags: C++ standardization format
---

The `<format>` header patch series
==================================

A short write-up with some additional information of the current `<format>`
patch series in review. This explains the goals and non-goals of the series.
The first part describes the current series, the second part the future plans.


Current patch series
--------------------

This patch series[^1] implements the first part of the `<format>` header. The
features implemented are:
- All format functions, including locale support.
- Formatters for:
  - strings, including Unicode support.
  - integers, there's an extension for 128-bit integers, but that's partly done.
  - chars
  - booleans
  - floating-point, only a stub.


[^1]: The series starts with [D103357]. Phabricator's revision stack shows the
      other patches in the series.

The implementation hasn't been optimized for speed nor for code size. This
means the code isn't intended to be ABI stable. Some of these optimizations are
required to be Standard compliant. The committee will probably approve another
ABI breaking change for C++20; [P2216]. This means the code isn't available on
the Apple platform since it requires ABI stability[^2].

[^2]: The current apple-clang version, apple-clang 12, has no concepts support
      which is required to use the `<format>` header.

The following parts haven't been implemented yet:
- Formatters for:
  - pointers
  - floating-point: This still requires me to finish `std::to_chars` for
    floating-point values.
  - handle class: This allows user defined formatters. These formatters may
	inherit from `std::formatter<T>`. Since `std::formatter<T>` isn't ABI
    it's a bad idea to increase the effects of an ABI break.
- `<chrono>` support.

*Note*: At the moment clang-format doesn't work well with concepts. Therefore
not all code has been formatted properly. Most code still sticks to an
80-column limit. This can be fixed after the series has landed. Fixing that now
has only a small benefit, but will probably result in merge conflicts.

*Note*: The patch series doesn't implement the correct module mapping. At the
moment there's no CI pipeline to test the modular build.  [D103559] implements
this pipeline. After it lands the series will be rebased and the module mapping
will be implemented.

The hope is to get these changes shipped in libc++13.


Future plans
------------

Assuming [P2216] will be approved and backported to C++20 during the June 2021
meeting the next steps will be:
- Optimize code size and performance:
  - Implement [P2216],
  - Implement improvements suggested and mandated by the Standard,
  - Implement other improvements marked with `TODO FMT`.
- Implement missing formatters:
  - pointers,
  - handle class.

After these changes the libc++ ABI should be stable. These features are planned
for libc++14. It would be great to get them in libc++13, but that's unlikely to
happen.

The next steps are:
- Finish floating-point formatting.
- Fully implement 128-bit integral support.
- Address all `TODO FMT` comments.
- Enable the feature macro `__lib_cpp_format`.

At this point the formatting (except `<chrono>`) is complete. However there
might be new papers and LWG-issues to implement.  For example, [P1636],
[P2093], and [P2286] might have landed in the C++23 draft.

The hope is to get this done before libc++14.

At this point focus will move to `<chrono>`, however the author hasn't checked
the current C++20 implementation status of `<chrono>`.


[D103357]: https://reviews.llvm.org/D103357
[P2216]: https://wg21.link/P2216
[D103559]: https://reviews.llvm.org/D103559
[P1636]: https://wg21.link/P1636
[P2093]: https://wg21.link/P2093
[P2286]: https://wg21.link/P2286
